.\"***************************************************************************
.\" Copyright (c) 1998-2005,2006 Free Software Foundation, Inc.              *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a  *
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the            *
.\" "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including      *
.\" without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,      *
.\" distribute, distribute with modifications, sublicense, and/or sell       *
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is    *
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:                 *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included  *
.\" in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.                   *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS  *
.\" OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF               *
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.   *
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ABOVE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM,   *
.\" DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR    *
.\" OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR    *
.\" THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.                               *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Except as contained in this notice, the name(s) of the above copyright   *
.\" holders shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the     *
.\" sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written       *
.\" authorization.                                                           *
.\"***************************************************************************
.\"
.\" $Id: curs_addchstr.3x,v 1.12 2006/12/02 17:02:45 tom Exp $
.TH curs_addchstr 3X ""
.na
.hy 0
.SH NAME
\fBaddchstr\fR,
\fBaddchnstr\fR,
\fBwaddchstr\fR,
\fBwaddchnstr\fR,
\fBmvaddchstr\fR,
\fBmvaddchnstr\fR,
\fBmvwaddchstr\fR,
\fBmvwaddchnstr\fR - add a string of characters (and attributes) to a \fBcurses\fR window
.ad
.hy
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB#include <curses.h>\fR
.PP
\fBint addchstr(const chtype *chstr);\fR
.br
\fBint addchnstr(const chtype *chstr, int n);\fR
.br
\fBint waddchstr(WINDOW *win, const chtype *chstr);\fR
.br
\fBint waddchnstr(WINDOW *win, const chtype *chstr, int n);\fR
.br
\fBint mvaddchstr(int y, int x, const chtype *chstr);\fR
.br
\fBint mvaddchnstr(int y, int x, const chtype *chstr, int n);\fR
.br
\fBint mvwaddchstr(WINDOW *win, int y, int x, const chtype *chstr);\fR
.br
\fBint mvwaddchnstr(WINDOW *win, int y, int x, const chtype *chstr, int n);\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
These routines copy \fIchstr\fR into the window image structure at and after
the current cursor position.  The four routines with \fIn\fR as the last
argument copy at most \fIn\fR elements, but no more than will fit on the line.
If \fBn\fR=\fB-1\fR then the whole string is copied, to the maximum number of
characters that will fit on the line.
.PP
The window cursor is \fInot\fR advanced, and these routines work faster than
\fBwaddnstr\fR.  On the other hand, they do not perform any kind of checking
(such as for the newline, backspace, or carriage return characters), they do not
advance the current cursor position, they do not expand other control characters
to ^-escapes, and they truncate the string if it crosses the right margin,
rather than wrapping it around to the new line.
.SH RETURN VALUES
All routines return the integer \fBERR\fR upon failure and \fBOK\fR on success
(the SVr4 manuals specify only "an integer value other than \fBERR\fR") upon
successful completion, unless otherwise noted in the preceding routine
descriptions.
.PP
X/Open does not define any error conditions.
This implementation returns an error
if the window pointer is null.
.SH NOTES
Note that all routines except \fBwaddchnstr\fR may be macros.
.SH PORTABILITY
These entry points are described in the XSI Curses standard, Issue 4.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBcurses\fR(3X).
.PP
Comparable functions in the wide-character (ncursesw) library are
described in
\fBcurs_add_wchstr\fR(3X).
.\"#
.\"# The following sets edit modes for GNU EMACS
.\"# Local Variables:
.\"# mode:nroff
.\"# fill-column:79
.\"# End:
