.\" Copyright (c) 2006 Apple Computer, Inc.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" @APPLE_LICENSE_HEADER_START@
.\"
.\" The contents of this file constitute Original Code as defined in and
.\" are subject to the Apple Public Source License Version 1.1 (the
.\" "License").  You may not use this file except in compliance with the
.\" License.  Please obtain a copy of the License at
.\" http://www.apple.com/publicsource and read it before using this file.
.\"
.\" This Original Code and all software distributed under the License are
.\" distributed on an "AS IS" basis, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, AND APPLE HEREBY DISCLAIMS ALL SUCH WARRANTIES,
.\" INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE OR NON-INFRINGEMENT.  Please see the
.\" License for the specific language governing rights and limitations
.\" under the License.
.\"
.\" @APPLE_LICENSE_HEADER_END@
.\"
.Dd May 23, 2006
.Dt MALLOC_SIZE 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm malloc_good_size ,
.Nm malloc_size
.Nd memory allocation information
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In malloc/malloc.h
.Ft size_t
.Fo malloc_good_size
.Fa "size_t size"
.Fc
.Ft size_t
.Fo malloc_size
.Fa "const void *ptr"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn malloc_size
function returns the size of the memory block
that backs the allocation pointed to by
.Fa ptr .
The memory block size is always at least as large
as the allocation it backs, and may be larger.
.Pp
The
.Fn malloc_good_size
function rounds
.Fa size
up to a value that the allocator implementation can allocate
without adding any padding;
it then returns that rounded-up value.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr malloc 3
