.\" Copyright (c) 2006 Apple Computer
.\"
.Dd December 11, 2006
.Dt CABS 3
.Os BSD 4
.Sh NAME
.Nm cabs
.Nd complex norm (absolute value) function
.br
.Nm carg
.Nd complex argument function
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <complex.h>
.Ft double
.Fn cabs "double complex z"
.Ft long double
.Fn cabsl "long double complex z"
.Ft float
.Fn cabsf "float complex z"
.Ft double
.Fn carg "double complex z"
.Ft long double
.Fn cargl "long double complex z"
.Ft float
.Fn cargf "float complex z"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn cabs "z"
computes the norm (absolute value) of the complex floating-point number
.Fa z .
.Pp
.Fn carg "z"
computes the argument (also called phase angle) of the complex floating-point number
.Fa z ,
with a branch cut on the negative real axis.  The result is in
the range
.Bq -\*(Pi , \*(Pi ,
and has the same sign as the imaginary part of
.Fa z .
.Sh EXAMPLES
The function foo defined in the example below applies a non-linear rotation to the
complex plane, such that points near the origin are not much affected, and points
far from the origin are rotated by about pi/2.
.Pp
This is accomplished by using cabs and carg to convert to polar coordinates, then
computing the transformation in that coordinate system, and finally converting back
to the usual rectangular coordinate system.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
#include <complex.h>
#include <math.h>

double complex foo(double complex z) {
  // get the polar coordinates of z
  double r = cabs(z);
  double theta = carg(z);

  // add a value dependent on r to theta
  theta += atan(r);

  // now change back to rectangular coordinates and
  // return the new complex number
  return r*cos(theta) + r*sin(theta)*I;
}
.Ed
.Sh SPECIAL VALUES
.Fn cabs "x + yi" ,
.Fn cabs "y + xi" ,
and
.Fn cabs "x - yi"
are equivalent.  This is used to abbreviate the specification of special values.
.Pp
.Fn cabs "x ± 0i"
is equivalent to
.Fn fabs "x" .
.Pp
.Fn cabs "±inf + yi"
returns inf even if y is a NaN.
.Pp
.Fn cabs "x + NaN i"
returns NaN, for finite x.
.Pp
.Fn cabs "NaN + NaN i"
returns NaN.
.Pp
.Fn carg "-0 ± 0i"
returns ±pi.
.Pp
.Fn carg "+0 ± 0i"
returns ±0.
.Pp
.Fn carg "x ± 0i"
returns ±pi for x < 0.
.Pp
.Fn carg "x ± 0i"
returns ±0 for x > 0.
.Pp
.Fn carg "±0 + yi"
returns -pi/2 for y < 0.
.Pp
.Fn carg "±0 + yi"
returns +pi/2 for y > 0.
.Pp
.Fn carg "-inf ± yi"
returns ±pi for finite y > 0.
.Pp
.Fn carg "+inf ± yi"
returns ±0 for finite y > 0.
.Pp
.Fn carg "x ± inf i"
returns ±pi/2 for finite x.
.Pp
.Fn carg "-inf ± inf i"
returns ±3*pi/4.
.Pp
.Fn carg "+inf ± inf i"
returns ±pi/4.
.Pp
.Fn carg "x + yi"
returns NaN if either of x or y is NaN.
.Sh NOTES
.Fn cabs
and
.Fn carg
are fully specified in terms of real functions:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
cabs(x + iy) = hypot(x,y)
.br
carg(x + iy) = atan2(y,x).
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr hypot 3 ,
.Xr atan2 3 ,
.Xr fabs 3 ,
.Xr complex 3
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.Fn cabs
and
.Fn carg
functions conform to ISO/IEC 9899:1999(E).