.\" Copyright (c) 2006 Apple Computer
.\"
.Dd December 11, 2006
.Dt CSQRT 3
.Os BSD 4
.Sh NAME
.Nm csqrt
.Nd complex square root function
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <complex.h>
.Ft double complex
.Fn csqrt "double complex z"
.Ft long double complex
.Fn csqrtl "long double complex z"
.Ft float complex
.Fn csqrtf "float complex z"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn csqrt "z"
computes the square root of the complex floating-point number
.Fa z ,
with a branch cut on the negative real axis.  The result is in
the right half-plane, including the imaginary axis.  For all complex
.Fa z ,
csqrt(conj(z)) = conj(csqrt(z)).
.Sh SPECIAL VALUES
The conjugate symmetry of csqrt() is used to abbreviate the specification of special values.
.Pp
.Fn csqrt "±0 + 0i"
returns +0 + 0i.
.Pp
.Fn csqrt "x + inf i"
returns inf + inf i for all x (including NaN).
.Pp
.Fn csqrt "x + NaN i"
returns NaN + NaN i.
.Pp
.Fn csqrt "-inf + yi"
returns 0 + inf i for any positively-signed finite y.
.Pp
.Fn csqrt "inf + yi"
returns inf + 0i for any positively-signed finite y.
.Pp
.Fn csqrt "-inf + NaN i"
returns NaN + inf i.
.Pp
.Fn csqrt "inf + NaN i"
returns inf + NaN i.
.Pp
.Fn csqrt "NaN + yi"
returns NaN + NaN i.
.Pp
.Fn csqrt "NaN + NaN i"
returns NaN + NaN i.
.Sh NOTES
If
.Fa z
is in the upper half-plane, then
.Fn csqrt "z"
is in the upper-right quadrant of the complex plane.
If
.Fa z
is in the lower half-plane, then
.Fn csqrt "z"
is in the lower-right quadrant of the complex plane.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr complex 3
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.Fn csqrt
function conforms to ISO/IEC 9899:1999(E).