.\" Copyright (c) 1985, 1991 Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     from: @(#)rint.3	5.1 (Berkeley) 5/2/91
.\"	$Id: round.3,v 1.4 2004/12/20 21:35:46 scp Exp $
.\"
.Dd July 02, 2008
.Dt ROUND 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm round ,
.Nm lround ,
.Nm llround
.Nd round to integral value, regardless of rounding direction
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <math.h>
.Ft double
.Fn round "double x"
.Ft long double
.Fn roundl "long double x"
.Ft float
.Fn roundf "float x"
.Ft long int
.Fn lround "double x"
.Ft long int
.Fn lroundl "long double x"
.Ft long int
.Fn lroundf "float x"
.Ft long long int
.Fn llround "double x"
.Ft long long int
.Fn llroundl "long double x"
.Ft long long int
.Fn llroundf "float x"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn round
functions return the integral value
nearest to
.Fa x
rounding half-way cases away from zero, regardless of the current rounding direction.
.Pp
The
.Fn lround
and
.Fn llround
functions return the integral value nearest to 
.Fa x
(rounding half-way cases away from zero, regardless of the current rounding direction) in the return formats specified.  If the rounded
value is outside the range of the return type, the numeric result is unspecified and the
"invalid" floating-point exception is raised. A range error may occur if the magnitude of 
.Fa x 
is too large. 
.Sh SPECIAL VALUES
.Fn round "±0"
returns ±0.
.Pp
.Fn round "±infinity"
returns ±infinity.
.Pp
The
.Fn round
functions may, but are not required to, raise the "inexact" floating-point exception for non-integer numeric arguments.
.Pp
The
.Fn lround
and
.Fn llround
functions need not raise the "inexact" floating-point exception for non-integer arguments that round to within the range of the return type.
.Sh NOTE
The
.Fn roundtol
function is deprecated.  Please use the C99 function
.Fn lround
instead.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr abs 3 ,
.Xr fabs 3 ,
.Xr ceil 3 ,
.Xr floor 3 ,
.Xr math 3 ,
.Xr rint 3
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.Fn round
, 
.Fn lround
, and
.Fn llround
functions conform to ISO/IEC 9899:1999(E).
